i'm gonna begin this live stream by
reading a letter i received from a
supporter on patreon and i'll return to
answering this question after just
addressing another more broad more
general also sent in to me through
patreon hannibal writes in and says
quote hi isil i am interested in
learning more about why some nations
succeed and why others fail
i have read guns germans and steel
and why nations fail these are the
titles of two separate books and i'm
already halfway through an economics 101
textbook by gregory menkeu
the author i don't know in this
particular case continue my quotation
quote but i want to learn more about
this and i was wondering if you could
offer some guidance to be more specific
i am indian and i'm very interested in
learning why my own country is such a
wreck as opposed to japan or the u.s
which are incredibly well-developed
nations this is a very
meaningful question that's why i'm
making this live stream now i'm happy to
answer it however
even built into the first sentence
there are incredibly
complex assumptions now
an assumption
is neither
right nor wrong the problem is that you
bring an assumption into an argument
into a discussion without fully
understanding it yourself right right or
wrong an assumption is going to be a
problem if it's not really disclosed to
you the idea of what it means for a
nation to succeed
and what it means for a nation to fail
and in what sense
india
is a self-evident failure and japan
a self-evident success is nothing
self-evident or simple about these
things now i am not trivializing the
question i'm just saying that there are
really a lot of things to to examine now
the questions i'm going to deal with in
this video this one and then the next
one i'm going to read you just a moment
here they are questions i've addressed
on the channel before
and
you know there's a kind of sense in
which philosophically the answers i have
to give today uh
are not different from the answers i've
given the past like on some profound
deep level the same answer but there are
a lot of ways in which up on the shallow
surface the answers i have to give today
are are very different sure of course
melissa looks surprised melissa did a
bunch of videos lately on the so-called
black hammer organization
um
the discourse about socialism the
discourse about capitalism the discourse
about communism
it's profoundly different in late 2021
than it was in early 2020 to use you
know we've lived through the rise and
fall of bernie sanders we've lived
through the rise and fall of a kind of
self-defeating social justice movement
in the united states of america uh
tearing down statues calling for
the abolition of the police so on and so
forth we've lived through these big
profound changes and
there's a subtle
long-term change in our thinking brought
about by joe biden fundamentally ending
the strategic alliance through the
united states and china
some that lasted from 1971 until the end
of the uh donald trump era or whether
you put the end of alliance during
donald trump or
it really only ends explicitly when when
joe biden says it's over forever and and
now it's over so we're probably moving
into a new epoch of looking at and
addressing the communist threat frankly
in a way we never did before in a way we
didn't what we haven't done since 1971
put it that way so you know the
emergence of of china as america's great
enemy now i'm recording this on monday
august 16th
china is gloating about america's
military defeat in afghanistan china is
openly saying that they are going to
support and make peace with the taliban
and have positive relations with the new
governments taking over afghanistan now
this is irrelevant in some ways to the
topics we're discussing here but it
illustrates the extent to which china
now has the attitude that they will they
will support anyone who's anti-american
and that they will you know even if it
is not in china's long-term
self-interest to support a muslim
fundamentalist regime in afghanistan
obviously this is not it's not in
china's interest it's not the interest
of communism or anything else um
nevertheless they'll do it just to just
despite the americans and obviously
right now under vladimir vladimir putin
russia has a similar zero-sum attitude
that's no i'm let's not say that
russia has a similarly malignant
attitude
zero sum is is an overused term show it
to everyone in the audience um so the
second question that i'm going to in
fact address first um comes in from a
supporter on patreon who just asked
simply what is socialism he says simply
that he hears it all the time but
doesn't really know what it means so i
saw that question i saw a few other
people react to it and then i posted in
patreon saying look i can make a new
live stream talking about this although
it is a topic of addressed in the past
and again
i mean if you did it every five years
you know why is the question being asked
what is the significance of the answer
there are a lot of things that have
changed obviously the most fundamental
definition of what socialism is and
isn't hasn't changed but why does it
matter why are we why are we asking the
question now and what are we going to
make the answer no so the last time i
discussed this
it mattered because of bernie sanders
and i think it's fair to say bernie
sanders is now relegated to a footnote
in history
no offense
um but that that came and went and there
was a great re-evaluation of of the
meaning of the word socialism and i kind
of had to put my foot down and say look
this is what socialism means and this is
what it doesn't in that context because
in many ways the supporters of bernie
sanders themselves were being
strategically vague as to as to what
bernie sanders himself meant in calling
himself a socialist and then what it
meant for his
followers the people who was recruiting
many of whom
many of whom were really communists
really had an anti-capitalist agenda as
they would say themselves whether or not
they'd use the term communists so you
know
in understanding socialism in the 21st
century the easiest way to explain it is
through military dictatorship
now as soon as i say that some people in
the audience might assume i am some kind
of right-wing pro-capitalist libertarian
or animal capitalist i am none of those
things
there was a time when our idea of what
the military meant was quite a bit more
complex
look into how the military operated in
the 10th century or the 15th century
there was nothing socialist about it the
way the military operates in any modern
western democracy in the 21st century is
as a socialist economy within a
capitalist economy taxpayers dollars are
gathered and they create a military
academy they create a miniature society
on each military base where the presence
and significance of money is largely
symbolic so this is a little bit
different from one country to the next
you know america versus
the british army versus the german army
or or what have you but very often on
the military base
all of the food men to men need to eat
is provided for free
by the army ultimate by the taxpayers
but then above and beyond that if they
want to buy candy bars or beer there's
some kind of recreational items they
they can pay for these things also
there's the cash kind of stuff they'll
often have a barber shop and this
differs from country to country is it
free to get a haircut or do you
have a haircut but in reality the barber
the guy working in the barbershop he is
himself also in the army he's not
private sector the army has educational
programs those have whole universities
and whole colleges different countries
without training within the base some
extent the education system is
completely socialist it will have and
this is maybe the most significant
example of all they have a medical
system right they have doctors they have
surgeons
every stage of medical care has to be
provided by the army and
this is the point many people say that
the united states of america has a free
market health care system that has a
capitalist private for profit health
care system
not the army
within the military
healthcare
is socialist
and
if you google it many of the distinct
features of socialism that's both its
critics and its supporters will
attribute to the concept are
demonstrated by medical care as provided
within the us army now i already gave
the disclaimer i'm not right-wing i'm
i'm not a libertarian i'm not an aero
capitalist in in this political sense
i'd never describe myself as even being
kind of pro free market you just kind of
have to understand what the free market
is and what it isn't what it's good at
and what it's not so good at what its
strengths and and weaknesses are and
obviously it would be completely
ridiculous to have a military base and
say oh well
let's get rid of all this socialism
let's just let the soldiers go and buy
their own lunch let's just let
mcdonald's and restaurants and let a
private let let local civilians set up a
vegetable market and they can buy their
own vegetables oh
let's let's let them get their own
haircuts they can cut each other's hair
uh let a private barber shop you know
show up and do these things oh
why do why do we need to provide them
with with health care why do we need to
run them with surgeons and doctors
when when soldiers get shot just let the
free market handle it just let them go
out like let them get out their wallets
and go and you know really serious like
if you're a serious animal gatherer say
oh well we can just give them a rebate
like the amount of money we're saving by
not charging the taxpayers to provide
medical care we'll give them more cash
we'll give them a higher salary and say
look from now on you handle your own
medical insurance you handle your own
paying for your medical services go go
and find your own doctor in the private
sector it could never it could never
possibly work i'll get into some other
situations where
socialism is either vastly more
efficient or it is really the only
option in terms of just organizing
people living together in high density
in a particular place so i don't say
these things because um i'm i'm opposed
in this sense to military modes of
organization
um
when you contrast the free market
private sector of medicine so we're
going to say the united states here but
this is true of cambodia it's true many
many countries we have a significant
role for the free market
there's really nowhere in the world that
has a true free market for medical
services the government is always
involved to some extent but you know
when you're looking at the contrast
between private sector and and uh
socialist uh medical services okay one
of the most striking things is to
compare the military to the the free
market uh provision of surgery
surgeons are paid dramatically less in
the military system right now
if
you went to medical school
through the military so if you learned
to be a doctor
going to a military college
the cost of your tuition was also less
so you see this is already this is the
pattern of socialism right lower tuition
lower salary i think you could probably
all say longer working hours maybe i
think i think you work pretty long hours
as a military surgeon maybe i'm wrong
let's assume the same
the same the same hours okay so and um
uh the services
are provided
in a way that is centrally planned now
okay a lot of
this sounds scary okay what does that
mean well there will be some military
bases that only have 50 guys some remote
military base uh in alaska or something
they're only they're only a few guys
there keeping a radar array going and a
place for helicopters and airplanes
there are 50 guys
on a military base but guess what you
have to have sufficient medical staff
there all the time to deal with an
emergency and you may have
they may do they may do nothing for 300
days a year there may be guys who are
being paid by the military like the same
salary as someone at a busy base but
they're the medical team just to sit on
that base and deal with emergencies at
this this smaller place that's a
centrally made decision now
if you're a right-wing libertarian or
another capitalist you say this is
inefficiency
it's also robustness right so in
economic terminology yes to have a
medical doctor sitting and doing nothing
at an army base for 300 days a year just
for the few days a year when there is a
medical emergency right that is
economically inefficient but it's also
economically robust right you're
prepared so now what does robustness
mean in this kind of context
this is a great example frankly okay
what if you take the opposite strategy
this could be again canada the united
states any large country the lord and
frankly even greece you could talk about
this all kinds of countries where you
have to have guys stationed okay well
what if you decide to save money as a
government making the central plains and
you say okay we're going to cancel
the deployment of those doctors and
nurses and again for this base maybe
it's one doctor and one nurse i don't
know so they don't have medical staff
ready to go all the time we're gonna
we're gonna cancel that and you know
what
if there's a medical emergency up at
this remote base we're just gonna be
prepared to send in helicopters with
emergency medical staff like as soon as
possible
okay so if that happens twice a year
look at the actual cost right like you
thought it was a cost savings to only to
only send in you know
medical teams when there was an
emergency but the cost of in an
emergency deploying someone where they
get there in alaska and the nearest base
is uh
with a with a large medical team is out
in the aleutian islands or something
okay so you're sending people a long
distance as fast as possible you know
kind of with danger pay and stuff the
actual cost to you the cost in jet fuel
the cost of doing this every time
there's an emergency is greater and
guess what there's also going to be a
cost in human lives sometimes people are
going to die who could have lived who
could have survived if there had been uh
medical teams there and the cost of
their injuries like people who don't die
but they have a more serious injury it
takes more time more care etc etc right
the actual medical costs are greater
because you didn't have someone on staff
so
this is this idea of of robustness
i used to have one
right-wing libertarian fan of the
channel mod vegan
she kept her cards close to her chest
but she was really a crazy right-wing
anarcho-capitalist libertarian type
person that's who she really was guys
and shortly after we had our one debate
that really revealed what a right-wing
nutcase she was she closed down her
youtube channel coincidence
[Laughter]
um
but you know i gave the example this is
this is many years ago on the channel of
how robustness works that if you're
running a hospital you may want to pay
some staff to stand around and do
nothing and those guys they're not
specialists they're not absurd they're
not like a heart surgeon they're not a
nutritionist they're not an electrician
they're not a janitor but you have
people standing around ready to help
even though they're not good at any one
particular job because when there
suddenly is an emergency when suddenly
you have 50 patients show up all at once
you need people who can just move things
around and follow orders and help out oh
look i need you to take this bed like
this gurney as we said bed on wheels and
take it over the other place and if you
don't have a staff standing around doing
nothing
then the people you ask to do that they
are specialists they are people who
could be doing something else instead
who could be doing a more important job
so this is an example of robustness and
economic theory that yes so anyone
someone some
some economist can show up at this
hospital and say oh well look you're
paying five guys to stand around and do
nothing
and you have to have someone church it
that's right
these guys today they're doing nothing
and maybe even 300 days a year doing
nothing but guess what there are times
when we really need them and if we
didn't have those guys these would be
the consequences of suddenly higher
costs and so on and again in that case
if you don't have excess staff on hand
maybe you have higher costs even just in
terms of you make a phone call and you
say to people look we're going to pay
you double overtime but we need you to
come in and help us out you know we have
we have extraordinary needs so
efficiency is one measure of robustness
okay now i said before if you look at
the military system of um
[Music]
medical care and it has a linked
system of education has been alluded to
and so on
it has both the advantages and the
disadvantages of socialism right i
mentioned
salaries are much lower economic
efficiency is much lower right
total cost is always surprisingly
shockingly high
so this is a pattern in socialism
and it's a pattern because of human
nature um so again i don't vilify this i
really don't
but
a case study i mean it's pretty well
documented but canadians are still
really uncomfortable talking about it
was that we had attempts again and again
to have the government here run
railroads
we'd attempts again again to have the
government run gas stations
and in every case whether you compared
the railroad the the government railroad
to the private sector railroad operating
at the same time
or if you compared it after
privatization so it's the same railroad
under government socialist management
and under private company management
amazingly everything got cheaper
everything became cheaper everything
like you know and not slightly cheaper
like dramatically cheaper the kind of
efficiency that's achieved by amazon.com
would not be achieved by a government
service now
unfortunately i mean to get a really
kind of down-to-earth honest discussion
of this that isn't from someone who's
either a left-winger making excuses for
socialism or a right winger trying to
you know offer an indictment of it is is
very difficult but
you know when you when you get into
details it's it's interesting and
you know it may not seem like it takes a
lot of genius
pardon me to run
a chain of gas stations efficiently
but guess what the government of canada
completely lacks that kind of genius you
know whatever the managerial talent is
and the willingness to make those
uh tough choices and to reorganize and
so on and the private sector you know of
course the private sector is not
flawless
companies go bankrupt companies fail you
know you have two companies competing
against each other and one is doing
everything right and the other is doing
everything wrong lots of examples of
this it's not that the free market is
inerrant but one of the interesting
patterns you see play out again and
again is this sort of unbelievable
inefficiency uh in the social system now
you know i am going to give my biased
comment on this but i'm going to
disclaim this is not a sort of complete
encyclopedic discussion of why
uh social assistance are so much so much
more efficient but i'm going to i'm
going to highlight one important aspect
it's important to me and probably for
you guys uh in the audience and support
you too shout out to lydia i was one i
was wondering what happened to what
happened she said she's been studying
for exams at med school all right
welcome back to the welcome back to the
cult
all right
so you know lydia
is in university studying to be a med
school student most of us have some
experience with an authoritarian
university you know climate being in the
context of a university
if the university is wasting money
who can question it
if you are a student
and you raise the question right the
professors say to you who the hell do
you think you are how dare your question
is
and they have power to shut you up and
silence you right now i used to be
married to a professor i've also been
personal friends with professors if a
professor
questions in you might be surprised to
learn that they are pretty effectively
silenced and shut up in the same way
they're told who the hell do you think
you are even if they go to a board
meeting and try to present something so
on and so forth and here's the other
thing you if you haven't been inside a
university you might not be able to
visualize this
even if the most senior executive at the
top of the university so he may have a
title like the president of the
university if he points his finger and
says hey
this is wasteful this is inefficient we
need to rethink this you would be amazed
at how good socialist systems are at
closing ranks against the people up top
and one way or another obfuscating
delaying shutting down becoming
intransigent resisting reform right
where where nothing changes or where
something very slight symbolically
changes like somebody was oh yeah we got
your point about how we're wasting money
and how we should fire people oh that's
a really good point we're going to give
it to the committee and we're going to
talk to the union and we're going to let
you know and you know they can they can
say anything back but to a remarkable
extent you know the change doesn't
happen even when orders come from the
top so i just say
um
just appealing to uh lydia being in
university if you've been in the
military i was talking to a guy the
other day about being in the canadian
military
you know the kind of inefficiency that
goes on and on forever for many years or
for decades and again this is what
happened within canadian
public sector railway service then so on
and so forth uh and it can happen within
the medical service um
could could it be different
in japanese culture just to give an
example like the generalizations i've
just made about humor it could be but
it's not
i mean a culture as different from ours
as japan oh i'm getting out of focus
some reason um a culture as different as
japan is from the united states and
canada remarkably reproduces the same
patterns of behavior so you know we
can't generalize too much we need there
have been experience with socialism in
africa there have been experiments in
socialism in in latin america and it's
remarkable how common these patterns are
and indeed um
[Music]
how different is it to be inside
university bureaucracy in japan as
opposed to the united states of america
canada how different is it really to
work inside a hospital in japan it's
interesting how the same patterns of
authoritarianism frankly play out again
again okay good good question from freda
all right so frida says most socialist
systems become dictatorships
so what i'm suggesting to you is is
different in a subtle and important way
what i'm saying is that socialist
systems
definitionally are
micro
graph scripts
let's get serious
what i'm saying to you is by definition
most socialist systems are
militant
okay okay
most socialist system no i'm not even
saying most all
socialist systems are by definition
miniature military dictatorships the
question is what kind of larger
democratic society are they a part of
and what kind of power suasion
transparency surveillance inspection
does that larger democracy impose upon
that miniature military dictatorship
i was merging miniature and military
into one word it was like miniature
military today that was what was
happening there when i was speaking so
you know now look
when you say that i've warned repeat
look i'm not right wing i'm not
libertarian i'm really not
um
in canada we have a lot of remote small
islands we have small islands in the
arctic we have small islands off the
east coast of canada and there are a lot
of situations where you can just look at
this piece of rock in the ocean and the
canadian government has some very good
reason why we need to keep a couple
hundred people living on this rock
it may be something like maintaining a
radar array it may be uh maybe fishing
and maybe all kinds of things maybe you
know military or strategic issues may
have to do with trade maybe you want to
have a port there that you can unload
things at or something i don't know
maybe maintaining a lighthouse this kind
of thing there's some remote piece of
rock and you look at this and you say
well
if you do this with the free market like
it's not going to be inhabitable like
this can't be inhabited at a profit this
can't be run at a profit this remote
community can't really have a grocery
store operating at a profit it can't
provide its own electricity at a profit
it can't provide sewage and plumbing at
a profit it can't provide medical care
at a profit and the government of canada
will end up one way or another running
this whole little outpost this whole
little village or community on a remote
small island as a socialist society
now uh look just say
one thing's out one of the themes i
wanted to talk about in this video is
the extent to which propaganda kind of
becomes reality through public education
technically uh hong kong in the 1980s
hong kong before it was taken over by
the economy technically
all of hong kong
was a socialist economy there was no
private property nobody owned land
all land was over the government most
people don't know this so everyone was
renting from the government the
government was everybody's landlord well
but i mean whatever whether you say hong
kong in the 1970s or 1980s whatever and
by the way hong kong in that period in
the british period they didn't have
democracy they really didn't okay but
they had pretty much all of the
advantages of capitalism and democracy
because people just pretended they were
a capitalist democracy people lived
their lives as if hong kong were a
capitalist market the whole period 1960s
1970s 1980s now you know likewise if you
have a small outpost
in some small island of canada
and the reality is there's one store
that provides people with groceries and
there's one doctor one uh one nurse or
something then you have this kind of
thing and it's all more or less
controlled by the government or even by
the military
uh people there
are nevertheless very likely to carry on
having democratic attitudes you know
they're likely to carry on having
democratic capital that is living and
treating one another in that same in
that same way they are not going to
treat each other the way citizens of
saudi arabia treat each other a country
that's never had democracy and isn't
democracy so just point out all of these
same issues like having a
miniature military dictatorship within a
larger society well that exists in saudi
arabia also that exists in so-called
communist china also right but the
difference is the larger the larger
society around it now am i an optimist
about this no i'm tremendously
pessimistic again i'll come back to
universities um you know as
worthwhile
you know to what extent are universities
in canada or the united states
democratic
well
if anyone in a university says something
that's really openly racist
the mass media and press and public
opinion pounce on the university and
demand that they become more politically
correct
okay so this is one example where
something like this kind of functions if
anyone at the university system that is
overly sexist overly dismissive or
contemptuous towards women there's some
capacity for the demos for the masses to
exert their their pressure on this
university for two of them the problem
is that's about it
that is about the limit that is about
the extent of
democracy on the university campus i
would say the same thing about hospitals
i think you guys can probably imagine we
had a scandal a couple months ago in
canada where somebody on some doctors
and nurses said some vaguely racist
things to a first nations woman who was
dying
and in all of the news coverage they
didn't want to mention what she was
dying of or why she was in the hospital
or why these doctors and nurses had such
a bad attitude towards her i'm not
making excuses for it but this woman was
lying on her deathbed dying and she
recorded the doctors and nurses saying
insulting things to her and probably it
was probably racist to some extent but
if not maybe those doctors and nurses
say installing things to all kinds of
people but yeah you know it's it raises
to some extent
um you know it's just just being a
vulgarian to some extent i was just
being a horrible person being a crass
and sensitive person in a situation
where you should have some more uh
sensitivity
but you know i know a lot of doctors is
like that um
okay and there was this mass outrage and
the government of quebec swore they
would solve this problem that they would
eliminate racism within the hospital
system
what really changed afterwards
okay
well
you can compare this to communist china
you can compare this to saudi arabia
there are other countries where these
little circles these little miniature
societies military dictatorship do not
even have this level of public oversight
public interest of democratic
invigilation where they aren't swept
along with a larger uh culture of
democracy so again you know no big deal
but even though um there is no democracy
whatsoever within american military
bases culturally there's a lot of
democracy and you know the fact is that
those guys when they're on holiday or
just if they have a weekend where
they're going down they go and they live
in a democracy they carry with them
attitudes uh that make life tolerable
within that within that military base
and that's
you know and a lot of these things
that's that's the best you can help okay
i'm just going to take a moment to um
uh to look at these comments thanks
everyone for writing in if you guys want
to you can hit the thumbs up button
it'll help some more people discover the
live stream it is no big deal either way
i'm doing this i'm doing this live
stream partly to wake myself up i'm
still writing and rewriting my book
might i might take a few more months
before i publish the book we'll see but
i've got uh i've got more to say
i've got more to say on paper and and
here and sometimes i get on camera and
say okay i'll answer some questions from
the audience um trying to sharpen myself
up before in the book i'm also i'm also
quitting caffeine again not for the
first time last time
i am almost at zero caffeine i've got to
say yep
i've been drinking only decaf i had i
had decaf coffee today and decaf coffee
yesterday
but let me tell you something decaf
coffee has more than zero caffeine and
it really does
um
all right so here's a useful comment
that i'm going to disagree with from
anonymous 101
anonymous 101 says in a free market
changes can happen faster while in a
more centrally pardon me while in a more
centralized planned economy
you've made a mistake in the writing and
sense he says can't become of the
bureaucracy so i'm sorry you i i get
what you're saying but you messed up
your sentence
you're 100 wrong
you're completely wrong
if the government of communist china
wants to build a train to tibet
it happens
now what happens
immediately there have been several
disasters in china in response to which
they built new hospitals
immediately with all of the efficiency
of ordering the army to deploy
centrally planned systems
are much faster than the free market now
you can imagine what would have happened
with certain medical emergencies that
happened
within the last year and a half or two
years if the government had just sat
back and said well let's let the private
sector take care of it we have all these
wonderful doctors and nurses and
hospitals and pharmaceutical companies
let's just let them do whatever they
think is best and work at their own pace
no
so you know one simple reason for that
is leadership that when you have
centralized planning you have leadership
you have decisive leadership and another
is just the nature of the budgeting
right is that the government has a
position to say do this now i don't care
how much it costs or we'll we'll deal
with the details of how much it costs
later so no um there's you know
uh in terms of making big changes fast
the government wins every time uh now
i'll give you another example what about
uh solar power what about changing the
way electricity is generated
if you just think about if you say okay
well let's just let small private
companies go out and do their own thing
okay
what about a centralized government
ordering something and making it
who invented the internet when you
actually go through the history pretty
much the whole development of computer
technology came about because the
government specifically especially the
us military made contracts and made
orders and and demanded things and then
yeah private private companies
contracted out and created them but they
say no a lot of that impetus in a lot of
that direction actually it comes from
from central planning whatever you want
to call it
oh so here's here's a similar reply from
from 12 sat 12 says quote uh
do not he or she does not defend china
chinese authoritarianism but in some
circumstances they can be more efficient
for instance they can mandate
new health policies
so yeah i've just i've just said
something very similar to what you said
there are
massive advantages to central planning
in the short term
so i
look i could talk about this all day but
you know uh to use a really
complex example briefly
the problem is that the advantages in
the short term can blind you to the
disadvantages in the long term right
so you know all right stick with um
solar power
uh
you could order the military
literally the military to produce and
install
solar power cells across the country
like not even contracting out you're
gonna say okay we're gonna take the
military corps of engineers we're gonna
take a whole bunch of we're gonna take
the sniper core like take guys whose job
is normally shooting guns some totally
unrelated french to military we're gonna
take men with guns ask them to put their
guns down and start installing thousands
of solar panels that we're gonna produce
and you can get it done
very very quickly
however
there are people living in kansas the
people living in wichita kansas there
are people living in all these different
places and after your mobilized army
team has swept through town they're
going to say well we don't have small
businesses here with the know-how to
repair and improve these things we don't
have companies with a grid working that
can collect this power and pay us for it
there are kind of all these other
organic elements of what would really
make solar power work in any in any
given place that rely a lot on the
private sector and just on people having
know-how and responsibility and so on
now
you know i would say
many countries have had to make the
decision about whether they want to
develop telecommunications
infrastructure now fast and have the
government do it at a tremendous cost or
have telecom telecommunications
infrastructure develop more gradually
with more private sector more
decentralized and thus uneven
uh innovation
and there are advantages and
disadvantages to both but yeah if you
want it done today
it's going to be socialism and it's
going to resemble
the military because again i just gave
this example having the military install
solar panels but if instead joe biden
says well it's not going to be the
military they're going to create a new
department of the federal government
they're going to wear a different
uniform well it's still men in uniform
being paid by the government and the
service to to deploy it so yeah uh uh
there are difficult questions about sort
of law
not even so much long-term
inefficiencies but long-term lost
opportunities and by having the
government take that initiative you are
crowding out
um private sector uh individual
innovative solutions that would have
would have pressed in to some extent
especially in a very large economy uh
like the united states of america so
those are those are tough decisions okay
okay so uh this is way off topic but
frida is just asking about chinese
citizens who filmed uh uh
police brutality and so on frida there's
there's a whole demon for that and what
can i tell you i mean it's it's a huge
world
i met someone who worked for a company
they accompanied their
charity and this
company existed
just to gather complaints
about the chinese government during the
brief time where they were on the
internet before they disappeared
and then to kind of chart or track the
chinese government response to these
things
um
you know the good news is that chinese
censorship of that kind
is often paired with a willingness to
the part of the chinese government to go
and solve the problem so it's true that
they want to silence people complaining
about the problem but they often do also
go out and go and solve it you know
whatever it is that's been exposed in
one of these scandals that they'll
they'll roll up their sleeves and go up
and you know so if there are corrupt
police officers it's true that they'll
want to delete the youtube videos
exposing the corrupt police officers but
they'll also want to get out and deal
with the problem which is culturally
very different from us uh in the west i
think here we just want to silence them
want to solve the problem okay so
richard is uh anticipating um the next
type of conversation here richard says
that he's very positive about india's
democracy and the way uh
okay the way that they are now finding
their own way uh depending on the people
rather than the
alternatives all right
nacho says everyone has to smash the
like button that's no big deal either
way all right um
okay so look
when i see this is now late 2021
when i see completely insane cult groups
like
black hammer organization
openly declaring that what they want is
dictatorship
i say i'm glad
[Laughter]
i'm glad they're disambiguating
the
intentionally misleading message that
the left wing has been playing with with
socialism for so many years
it's really the kind of crazy fringe
communists like black hammer
organization who are taking this frankly
the same promises made by bernie sanders
really they're made by bernie himself by
other people in his camp people's room
taking them and then telling you the raw
naked reality of what it is they're
offering or promising so what is what is
black hammer
organization promise they don't have a
better way to provide health care they
don't have a better way to generate
electricity they don't have a better way
to manufacture cars what they are
offering is the militarization of the
free market when they promise socialism
what they are honest in saying is that
what that promise means is that they're
going to take functions in society
that currently are done through whatever
hybrid of free market private enterprise
free individuals charging whatever fees
they want to charge and some role for
government regulation government
guidelines and government oversight
that they are going to take that stuff
out of the private sector and put it
into the public sector they're going to
bring it under the control of a
dictatorship now what that means in
practice
is the militarization of the whole of
the economy and the whole of the society
now most people who will be this honest
with you about it are crazy right-wing
they're some kind of
libertarian uh some kind of
anarcho-capitalist and i'm not as i keep
telling you i'm just really being honest
with what these things mean um
you know
okay uh this is going back many years
i remember reading
how old am i now okay i'm 42. i remember
reading many many years ago probably
more than 20 years ago about the school
system in new orleans
so this is the southern state of
louisiana within the united states of
america that the school system there was
just absolutely terrible was at this
absolute crisis point and the government
was considering whole new directions to
take on with with the school system
right okay now let's just take that for
granted i don't want someone in the
comment section say no i was in new
orleans 20 years ago and the equality of
education was great for the purpose of
this hypothetical
you know purpose of this hypothetical
discussion
let's just take it for granted the
quality of education in louisiana and in
new orleans specifically was awful 20
years ago let's just
let's just suppose that for the sake of
morgan
now at that stage
you could have proposed you know what
guys this is a crisis as really matters
and we can't just have another
generation of kids grow up with a
terrible education
someone could have proposed creating a
completely socialist
system of education someone could have
proposed having the military take over
all the schools
and guys you can visit military colleges
there are military colleges there are
military perfectly good universities
as i was saying before about the
difference between being a medical
doctor in the army being a medical
doctor the private sector in some ways
it's different and in some ways the same
the could have said you know what
these universities we've got are
we're gonna shut them down
we're gonna hand them over to the us
army and the same way that there's an
official
navy university and there are several
army colleges these are just gonna
become army run colleges there are
literally gonna be we're gonna fire all
the professors or if they want to be
hired back they've got to wear a uniform
and get a salary from the military and
that's it you know what the whole way
we've organized these little local uh
school boards
that's over
a local school board we're done
with it it failed we are gonna we're
gonna organize this in the federal
government now
again two things would be happening here
one
the teachers would probably be paid less
i mean with universities that's very
obvious private university in america
every professor is getting over one
hundred thousand dollars
you can look up how much or how little
military professors make i would guess
fifty thousand dollars six dollars on
this it's gonna be a very modest amount
of money right so investors would pay
less but the total budget for the
institution is going to become infinite
by comparison it's no longer one little
county with one little school board
trying to eke out the budget for its
school just with the tax revenue from
that tiny county within louisiana
suddenly you've got the whole the
coffers of the the federal government
behind you anyone could have made the
argument 20 years ago now anyone
committed but you know what
this is an emergency this is for the
best
let's let's
militarize the education system now as i
said earlier about solar power
if you don't want the uniform
if you don't want the odium
of admitting that this is a military
dictatorship
you can create a new government bureau
and a new uniform oh no no it's not the
military it's the new um
emergency state task force for
improvement of education and this is
their uniform
you can do the same thing like just like
you can create a new bureau that's just
to install solar power cells you can
create a new government bureau with new
uniform but really structurally
economically in every important way you
are creating a new little military
dictatorship right and they're going to
follow orders they're going to get their
salaries accordingly and there's gonna
be absolutely no democracy unless as i
already described that democracy is the
kind where the outside democratic
society is is bringing some um
forcing some transparency they're
they're invigilating and gossiping about
and complaining in the newspapers about
it and then the government responds to
that discourse so it can be this kind of
external and indirect democracy right
so if we all travel back in time man
time's like this is now 2021. i'm
probably thinking more than 20 years ago
okay we go back through 2001 and say
guys we got this great idea a whole new
school system we're going to try this
thing called socialism
i think in louisiana specifically nobody
would respond pause for that maybe you
got to make up a new name for it
okay i can i can guarantee
short term
that would be an improvement like i
could guarantee within like the first
two years or something that would be an
improvement you would sweep away
all the problems
but here we are in the real world in
2021 and you can see what louisiana
actually did
you know over those 20 years and you can
see
that there's actually another type of
learning that really matters in leaving
government democratically to tinker with
and struggle with education to try new
reforms
to have schools being responsive to and
responsible to local constituents right
to try new things again and again and
indeed to have competition with the free
market to have competition with private
schools that's the reality is that if
you have money in louisiana you're
sending your kid to a private school not
to a public school
that actually pardon me
that process of open-ended and uncertain
struggle
has produced a better school system in
louisiana today than they had 21 years
ago
now
i am the last person to glorify
either alternative right
but the point is if you take that step
i've had people write into me claiming
that quote crowding out doesn't exist
okay so the crowding out effect all
right whatever innovation is possible by
having the private sector and a whole
bunch of little school boards struggling
to provide decent education for kids
whatever innovation is possible in that
chaotic patchwork right
that innovation disappears when you have
a single centralized authority
you know creating a kind of military
dictatorship that governs education
right
and again i'm admitting
with when you start at a low enough
level i mean we can say this about
cambodia today a lot of countries a lot
of countries have a really bad
education we say well look guys this
doesn't work so we're going to wipe out
capitalism we're going to wipe out
democracy we're going to wipe out the
private sector for education not for
everything but just for this little area
of education that's what many countries
do with healthcare they they say look
forget it we don't want to have a free
market or private sector another this
special category okay but if you do that
you can guarantee there will be no
innovation at all and in a very
meaningful sense there will be no
freedom at all
now look guys
i have mixed feelings about this if you
live in cambodia
i think this is the same thing in new
orleans louisiana if you live in
cambodia rich people and poor people do
not go to the same schools and it's very
easy to feel and i do feel wouldn't the
world be a better place if the
government just made these private
schools for rich kids illegal
and forced rich kids and poor kids to go
to the same school together you know
it's very easy to feel the weight now
you have to drive around i mean in
cambodia they're all close together so
you can see there's the school for the
rich kids there's the school for the
poor guys you can walk i walked there i
never owned a car and
i never never even rented a car or
anything
um you know in a in a state like
louisiana i think probably the distance
is quite significant to go from the
schools where the the poor people go and
in in louisiana and new orleans there is
certainly an ethnic component to this
there's a there's an issue of the
history of racism in the state and
ongoing racial division to richard
you can look at the school where the
poor people go and there are no rich
people there and go to this school for
the rich people and there are no poor
people it's very easy to look at that
and say look
all of this can be improved tomorrow if
we just take a more muscular approach as
a government a more socialist approach
and say no forget it rich people are not
allowed to go to a private school
anymore no more private sector no more
freedom no more freedom of choice no
more free market competition no more
competition schools will be the best
school we're going to forcibly integrate
this we're going to have one school
system answer to one standard that is a
simple answer
to a complicated question
right
and
i don't think there's anyone here who
knows the american um
who knows the american
medical system or education system that
well to answer this way but you know if
you can sit down with a doctor who
really understands the american health
care system
and if you said to them hey look what
for for the sake of society as a whole
for the sake of our our future for the
sake of social justice we're going to
completely eliminate all of the private
universities teaching medicine there's
going to be no more you know
in the states most of the famous
multi-million dollar universities these
are all private institutions i just
mentioned that the ivy league
institutions there are some famous
government universities we say okay you
know what we're going to completely
eliminate private education and instead
all doctors are going to be educated in
the military system they're all going to
go to military school
and they're basically
the military medical system is going to
swallow the private sector
medical system
if you said that to an older person who
really knows the
american health care system and who's
being really candid they might say you
know what you're going to do you are
going to eliminate the only competent
surgeons in the united states of america
you are going to be replacing confidence
with incompetence you are going to be
eliminating the elite system education
and replacing it with the worst system
education there are people who can sit
down and talk to you just how
how much worse the quality of education
and the confidence of the people is
produced by the worst schools in
medicine so
this is a factor you can look at
cambodia and say oh what a terrible
thing that rich people are being
educated separately from poor people but
you can also look at and say at least
some people are getting an education and
if we eliminate this product i've been
to those schools i've really i really
live in cambodia really i'm living in
laos too this way i love that if you
eliminate those elitist schools in
cambodia
and then the rich do not have education
any better than the poor in cambodia
you know
will there be a single competent surgeon
produced in cambodia a single competent
architect a single competent anything
anyone who's competent at speaking
english so this like you may be if you
eliminate the private sector you may be
eliminating all of the talent you've got
actually and potentially for the future
the harm you're doing may really be
tremendous it may really be considerable
so i'm just being honest with you
um
i don't think i don't think you know the
good can wash out the bad and i don't
think the bad can wash out the good you
know what i mean i i do not think um
either system frankly is morally
justifiable i mean i think you're in a
situation where you're looking at two
um two very bad alternatives uh when
you're talking about whenever you put it
into applications when you're talking
about something like education something
like the medical assistant and stuff and
so forth
so yeah um
for me that's a wrap on socialism
i mean i really feel like
know in the year 2022 that just one year
from now i feel like we're moving
towards a clearer mutual awareness
of what
socialism is what the threat of
communism is
uh you know what capitalism is not as an
ideology but you know in in practice
pragmatically and so on i think that
countries like the united states of
america are becoming more self-aware
about what it is they really represent
historically and presently and actually
you know as opposed to being completely
deluded about what the united states
represents you know i mean uh and i do
think just being being honest here you
know um
i think that within europe also uh
europe is kind of too broad to
generalize
well
in a recent video was talking about the
history of neoliberalism right you know
um
certainly the idea of what left and
right mean what socialism and capitalism
mean in england are much much uh much
much clearer today uh than they were
under tony blair or in the immediate
aftermath
all right i will look at the comments
for just a second so sorry uh just to be
clear you had this period with tony
blair you had the attempt to redefine
the labor party as a hard socialist
party and then in the last elections in
england you had a clear rejection of
that so england also is um
step by step moving forward to being
being as disambiguating what had
formerly been tremendously ambiguous
things in modern western politics
okay well
what am i supposed to do am i supposed
to
delete these comments from our most
devoted troll
yeah guys put years into this
years of his life that he'll never get
back
okay so we have some comments here that
are kind of the opposite of what i'm
going to be talking about in the
remainder of the video so they might be
interested to move out for pardon me
they might be interesting to read out
for that um that reason
so uh uh atlanta richards says culture
current wealth and amount of democracy
within each nation will be drastically
different from ireland assuming the
irish model is followed elsewhere as far
as worldwide
um
so you'll see why i'm quoting that
ah
so um
all right i won't get into a digression
but this frida mentions the medical
system in cuba i'm sorry to say that
that's all propaganda once you look into
it uh cuba has this system of providing
free medical education for doctors but
the doctors who are produced by that
they know less than nurses in our system
so they have they have absolutely no
competence to do things like surgeries
so the um
the the socialist cuban
medical doctor
phenomenon and of them accepting
students from overseas and training them
to go
supposedly to go back to their
communities and be medical doctors with
this free education they received in
cuba i'm sorry to say yeah i i was also
shocked i've talked to people face to
face who worked with those with those
doctors
um
so that's an interesting i mean you know
now it has to be asked does that really
tell you something about socialism i
wouldn't even generalize in that sense i
think what the cuban
example shows you is the extent to which
systems of education and government
programs can proceed and flourish for
years
um with no connection whatsoever to
measurable outcomes
so you know to give an example
you can have a school that is teaching
people
cinematography cinematography means
filmmaking how to make films and the
students don't actually learn how to
make films and nobody cares so for years
and years and years students pay huge
amounts of money ten thousand dollars
fifty thousand dollars to study
cinematography and they receive a
certificate at the end saying oh you
know how to make films and in reality
they're just sitting in a classroom
where they chit chat with the professor
about movies they've watched
people like this people enjoy it there
are teenagers who are very happy to
spend money put themselves in debt or
spend their parents money to get an
education in so-called film and all
they're learning is film appreciation
and they're writing essays they watch
star wars they write an essay about it
they chitchat with a professor they do
this for four years
but there's no measurement of okay but
can this kid actually use a camera can
this kid actually give an example i've
used talking to filmmakers i know can
this kid take two people on a rooftop
and film them having a fight scene a
fist fight do they know how to set that
up and film it and stage it safely and
then edit
are they actually capable of filmmaking
and the answer is no so you guys have
probably heard me use examples but
language learning this way you have a
language language learning program where
supposedly people are learning chinese
after four years they can't actually
speak chinese so that is a very broad
institutional phenomenon and um
that's very just funny comment here uh
anyway it's a very broad that's a very
broad phenomenon and uh uh the cuban
socialist medical system seems to be an
extreme example of it sat 12 asks what
is this black hammer organization is
this an actual organization a
theoretical well melissa who is sitting
next to me here made a great video about
it and i do like melissa's own
commentary in the video but one of the
most important parts of the video
is just the the quotations she uses from
black hammer but you know quoting from
their own uh so this is a super censored
video on my channel you might not be
able to find it uh searching around so
don't don't interrupt now don't don't
stop watching the live stream now to
watch it but there is melissa's video
on black hammer
you do a second one babe i remember
maybe
so communism in america colin blackham
okay right so that's the one that has
the clips from the um
the skype calls okay good yeah yeah
that's that's the one thing yeah anyway
that's this great video melissa made and
i i'm
sorry to see well i'm sorry to say it's
important
but
in some ways you know i'm i'm happy this
is happening i'm sorry if i drifted off
of war but i think disambiguation is an
important uh concept a lot of the
beliefs that had been ambiguous before
on the left are becoming unambiguous all
right so return to the question that i
read at the very start of this live
stream
hannibal wrote in through patreon he
says hi isil i'm interested in learning
more about why some nations succeed and
others fail he says he's read this
horrible book guns germs and steel and
another book that i haven't heard of
called why nations fail the second one
i've heard i do know about guns german
steel all right and he said he's halfway
through an economics 101 uh textbook by
gregory menkeu
who i don't know
he says quote i want to learn more about
this and i was wondering if you could
offer some guidance
to be more specific i am indian and i'm
very interested in learning why my
country is such a wreck as opposed to
japan or us which are incredibly well
developed nations okay
so guys um
all right so there's a good comment here
i want to reply
all right so that's that's the question
i'm going to apply you in just one
second after i reply to this thing
that's just been said by william again
uh so william says school choice for
everyone would let inferior and
dangerous public schools in the united
states disappear so william i don't know
how old you are i know you know there's
more to it
you know there's more to it right
so we're going through this right now
with attempts to reform uh health
insurance in the united states of
america right so do you have
multiple health care systems
but the richest people and the
healthiest people opt into one health
care system one system of health
insurance
leaving behind
the poorest people and the most disabled
people and the sickest people
you see the problem here so then all the
people with money are paying into the
system that needs at least
and the system that needs the most money
has the most dependent non-productive
people are in a separate system right
you say school choice for everyone would
let me furious and dangerous
you say school choice would let inferior
public schools disappear
wrong
the problem is to be more polarizing the
problem is that when you have school
choice then the richest students and the
most evil students they have a choice
and they go up to the best schools and
guess who's left behind the people who
don't have a choice so you increasingly
have a system which the poorest least
resource schools actually need the most
resources they're helping the students
who need the help the most now now
that's partly just because of mental
disability some people are dyslexic some
people are artistic so
but there are other factors too i mean
students who are poor students who have
parents who can't educate them outside
of the classroom need more help with
education but the the biggest one of all
of course is not poverty it's
multiculturalism the problem is you have
so many students who are in the poor
school system who speak english as their
second language or their third language
they have a special challenge they need
more help they need more education just
to reach levels of fluency in english
reading and writing ability right you
need smaller classrooms more teachers
more effort more resources there so
william
again you may you may know this and
you're just nothing i don't i don't
judge you by a one sentence comment on
you i don't think oh this is this is who
you are you know i understand it's a
casual it's a casual comment
the most important pattern to remember
about the free market when you're
contracting the free market to
government services and we can gloss
government services as socialism and we
can gloss government services as
military dictatorship as i've been
saying but when you talk about the free
market then you're talking about a more
unequal distribution of resources and
choices all right when the free market
is left to operate there are going to be
a hundred or a thousand different
companies in downtown new york competing
to provide you with
plumbing if you have a leak in your
faucet you can phone five different
plumbers and find out how much it'll
cost to fix the leap leak and there are
all these different companies competing
to do plumbing jobs in downtown new york
but guess what that's the locus of the
greatest economic activity how many
schools are there private sector schools
competing in downtown new york right
okay now look at saskatchewan now look
at kansas now now look at cambodia now
look at new orleans you know what i mean
the clustering effect and the
exacerbation of inequality and that in
some places there are too many choices
so just new york los angeles chicago
you'll have a ton of schools and a ton
of plumbers if it's private sector right
and then in other places there's only
one choice or there's no choice at all
mr but get real you talk about school
choice do you have any idea how many
towns have one school there there is no
choice like if you if there's one school
either it's run by the government or
it's run by a private corporation or
private charity like either it's both so
like
coast to coast across america across
europe even within england i've been in
towns in england where there's one
school
they're not gonna have ten schools for
parent's troops not reality right now
sorry beyond that you know there are a
lot of other conflating variables here
like religion
when you go to a town in england that
has two schools you know why one's
catholic there's a catholic school and
there's the non-catholic this is the
reality right you know sometimes by the
way this there's an anglican school
there's a protestant school you know
with their religious division street
schools okay so now you have a
quote-unquote choice
how do you like your choice do you want
to put your kid into a catholic school a
partisan school or a secular school
right and guess who's in the secular
government school right again you're
going to get disproportionate
some burdens are going to be
disproportionately in the public system
so no school choice for everyone it it
doesn't solve the problem you name here
right the specific problem you name that
inferior and dangerous schools would
disappear no you know how bad teachers
disappear because you fire them
you know how bad hospitals improve
because you show up and you shut them
down you demand they reach higher
standards you need really coercive
really active roles from government
going into schools and evaluating them
and holding to a higher standard right
you need a really coercive royal
government going into hospitals and
raising the higher standard and guess
what that's the way the military works
too all right there's no way free choice
is going to be standards in the military
you have people breathing down your neck
you have superior officers you have
people demanding excellence and showing
up and evaluating what's wrong when
you're not achieving excellence right
that's how
that's how the school system works is
how the healthcare system works that's
how all these things were and it's it's
tragedy i mean it's there's this
wonderful dream that right-wingers you
know um
right-wingers want to rely on there's
this wonderful beautiful dream that you
can just let let people have freedom of
choice you just let the free market
operate blindly and it's going to result
in higher standards for everyone and
it's it's not true in any um
any sector of the economy in any example
like this
so all right well this guy he is willing
to
create a new account every five minutes
to come in and join the
well i guess we've learned he doesn't
work mondays i don't think today's a
holiday in canada
oh there you go
let me tell you something guys you may
think we have a lot of uh a lot of free
speech here in canada but we don't
um the the harassing communications act
is is it's remarkable how little freedom
of speech you have what this guy is
doing actually is a crime in canada and
he actually can go to jail for two years
for it so i can i can provide the link
let's say
yeah a term in prison of not more than
two years
so there you go so if fandor wants to
look it up
um that's the reality all right
okay so
okay i want to get back to this question
from from patreon all right um
right so atl richard says stages of
analysis is lost to most of us right
sorry i often talk about full life cycle
analysis so don't just think of a single
stage think about as a knowledge and i
was saying that before in the critique
of socialism now i'm in effect doing a
critique of the private sector uh the
private sector option right so anonymous
101 said oh wait so m roland says like
internet providers and electricity
exactly so if you have free market
competition for internet provision you
have 10 different options in new york
you have 10 different options in los
angeles competing but then a huge part
of the united states of america there's
one or zero sometimes there's zero but
most places there's one okay you have
comcast or nothing you have no no
effects of uh
you have no effects of a free market
competition
okay um
anonymous 101 says quote
why would people choose a worse option
in a free market question mark there
would be competition that would beat out
the worst business so another one one i
am not saying this to insult you in any
way but i'd like to ask how old you are
okay
i'd like to ask how old you are all
right
why don't you go
to a poor black neighborhood in
louisiana
where there's one school
and why don't you ask the parents of the
children
at this
there are schools there where a hundred
percent of the children are black
there's a predominant let's say it's 80
black but a predominantly black
predominantly poor school in louisiana
and ask them ask the parents why don't
you just choose a better school
for your children
what part of this don't you get
like some people
have no choice like that's that's what
we're talking about here some people
have no choice some people have very few
choices
some people have a choice where all of
them are bad
you can live in a part of the city where
there are three schools
all of them are bad you know you can
talk to parents their kids went to three
different schools well they went to this
school you know the gym teacher was a
jerk he had a conflict with the gym
teacher so then we tried this school and
it was just as bad but he didn't have
the conflict with the gym teacher and
somebody told us this other school was
better but we tried it was no
you know now okay now why don't you look
at that from the investor's perspective
all right i don't know if you know this
about capitalism it relies on this thing
called investment
do you think there's a multi-millionaire
strolling through that same neighborhood
in louisiana
and thinking you know what
i could make a lot of money
offering these people a better
educational alternative at a profit
oh you think there's money in poverty do
you is that
now there may be like let's be real
there may be investors walking around
the neighborhood saying hey you know
what i can open a pizza restaurant here
there are all kinds of businesses that
flourish in poor neighborhoods you know
poor neighborhoods they still buy things
they still have economic activity but
you know what do you think someone's
going to show up and say you know what
i'm going to spend the next 20 years of
my life bringing a really excellent
standard of education to this poor black
neighborhood in louisiana and there are
exceptions
and the exceptions are religious maniacs
right
i like you think it would be any problem
you could go to saudi arabia and do the
fundraising today and you could say hey
you know what there's this poor black
neighborhood in the american south and i
think if we set up a school here we can
convert people to islam by offering them
a better alternative education you'll
get money yo that's what happens with
religion i've seen that going on with
buddhism there are buddhist educations
there are people who will be committed
they'll be committed because they're
religious fanatics by the way including
mainstream christians you know
protestant and catholic who will say hey
they are going to put the next 20 years
of their life into operating a school in
this poor black neighborhood and they're
doing it independently of the government
to whatever combination of donations
would have because again private sector
doesn't necessarily mean for-profit you
could be you can be non-government you
can be a private sector or entity that
mostly is relying on donations or what
have you you know but whether they're
catholic or the pro there are there are
religious fanatics and
obviously i do not support this model of
education either so i'm sorry but you
know the guy who said this
um
quote
why would people choose a worse option
in a free market
and louisiana is not the most extreme
example i can talk to you about cambodia
i can talk to you about laos
we can talk all over the world you know
or whatever you know
when you get in an ambulance and say
i've been shot
take me take me you know take me to be
patched up by a surgeon
what what do you think you think you get
out get out a book of pros and cons and
say well you know let's look at what's a
good hospital i can go to let's look at
the which one charges a good price or
something you know you go to the nearest
hospital when i was doing healthcare
sector research in cambodia so all the
research showed and the other
researchers with me they said look it's
the same in every country in the world
people go to the nearest dentist like 90
of the time
unless they have a problem with the
nearest dentist they know it's a bad
dentist they go to the nearest dentist
they go to the nearest doctor they go to
the nearest hospital there is no
evaluation there is no free choice
even when there are other choices like
oh i could drive for another 30 minutes
and get to another hospital if it's only
30 minutes people don't don't live that
way you know so to me it's a hilarious
question why would people choose a worse
auction a free market what choice
what are you talking about and who
provides the choice investors provide
those choices only when there can be a
profit made and again
the fact that you can run a business
that makes a profit as a plumbing
company in manhattan new york city
doesn't mean that you could run that
same business at a profit on a remote
small island a small community with only
a few hundred people it doesn't mean you
can run that business at a profit even
in louisiana right so and plumbing is
relatively simple compared to uh
education and it's years and years of
your life if you are the millionaire
investor who's gonna run this school all
right you gotta have love i thought
about this guys i thought about opening
and running a school in laos or cambodia
my old stomping ground i was involved in
education there and esl and things we
thought about opening an english school
in in taiwan and stuff you know
so it's a lot of love it's a lot of uh a
lot of stuff too a lot of stuff surfaced
okay so cool so look an honest one i'm
not trying to beat up on you but i'm
just i'm just illustrating this so he he
wrote back and said that he's 23 years
old so look dude
i'm not hating on you
but sure in the in the real world you've
got a lot to learn about these things
and some of these things you don't get
out of an economics textbook
okay so some great questions but i've
gotta answer the question i've already
got coming from um
coming from patreon
okay all right so
there are a lot of fascinating topics
here i could digress into into uh uh
talking about um okay so
i'll deal with this quickly it's
possible i've done youtube videos
talking about this before talking about
reform education so william mcginn says
school vouchers for everyone
to to let them go where they want some
schools are violent and you need armed
police at the front door philadelphia is
a prime example okay so
william
um
why doesn't the free market
handle the sewage treatment system
why does the government have to build
pipes connecting your house to a sewage
treatment system why can't the
government just give you a voucher and
say hey
you have sewage
you take care of it
why doesn't the government just hand out
one million vouchers to one million
people
and say look the government doesn't want
to spend time and money and effort on
this anymore everybody solved their own
sewage problem here's a voucher
okay
william what about roads
if you own a car
build roads what's your problem what's
the matter bro don't you know private
sector companies they make concrete they
make cement they meant they make tar
macadam everything you need to build a
road you can get on the free market
so why doesn't the government say look
forget it we're not fixing potholes
anymore we're not putting up stop signs
or traffic lights if you people want
roads we're going to give you vouchers
like we're going to charge lower taxes
we're going to i'm going to hand out
vouchers so if you own a car if you want
roads if you think that's in your
interest that's on you that's up to you
to provide to everybody why do you think
that is
[Laughter]
all right now the reality is right
wingers are not this naive they're not
this stupid they pretend to be because
of racism
um the whole argument for school
vouchers in the united states of america
it was created in order to resist and
oppose racial integration of schools of
having black people and white people in
in the same schools so no i'm sorry but
the school vouchers argument is
laughably stupid now uh tell me some
swim
okay so we have we have uh remote
poverty-stricken first nations people
here so the cree the ojibwe in the
united states let's say the navajo okay
so you get the navajo living out in the
middle of the desert oh
some communities a few hundred people
you know oh oh you guys want a school
oh here are some vouchers
what are you gonna do you're living in a
community of 300 people
in the middle of the desert
you're a navajo tribe member
how are you going to how are you going
to prove education
for your children with this voucher
really well and what's the quality of
that education you'd be oh okay and you
know william you know um
even in a big city where there are a lot
of options oh you know in paris france
they got a lot of muslim fundamentalists
what do you think the the effect is
going to be if all the children whose
parents are muslim fundamentals you just
give them a vote and say look you take
care of your own kids you decide what's
best for your kids it's up to you you
make your own rational choices now are
you kidding me
obviously it's not just muslims whether
it's muslims or buddhists or i mean some
parents are just stupid too some parents
aren't a member of a religion they're
just idiots they're not capable of
making good decisions for their children
the same way they're not capable of
making good decisions about sewage
treatment plants or building roads any
one of these things let alone all of
them at the same time right you know
what people actually can't do for
themselves what government does to them
and i'm sorry but how can anyone be so
blind education does not operate at a
profit like if you look at the sector as
a whole it's a money-losing endeavor
it's a money-losing phenomenon right
you know if you want to provide maybe
there's someone in science right now who
really wants to provide world-class
education for the cree people for the
ojibwe people for the navajo indians i'm
saying this because they're examples of
poor people in rural areas but there
were white people there were white
people living in remote poor poverty
certain areas too we were talking about
black people in in louisiana there may
be some people in this audience right
now who actually have some kind of
humanitarian motivation to do that none
of you none of you would think about
doing it at a profit
none of you would say that you are going
to get rich
offering education to the poorest and
most disadvantaged people in the world
all right and and the voucher thing i
mean that that is a bad joke that is a
footnote at the end of america's long
history of slavery racism
and
quote-unquote integration um the
integration of what had formerly been
desegregation the desegregation of the
school system so
william again i'm sorry i'm sorry if you
feel insulted i know
i have to perform this is a performance
to some extent but i don't assume you're
you're a terrible person i just assume
you've been misled by
you know the propaganda that you know
genuinely a lot of a lot of right-wing
libertarian groups do spread around that
somehow
um
school vouchers will solve the problem
all that school vouchers will do
is put more power into the hands of the
church whether it's the christian church
or a muslim fundamentalist or what have
you and there are actually examples in
the us where that was why they reversed
the policy where they started moving
towards school voter system and then
they were horrified to see that this
what this led to specifically in terms
of islam within the united states i
haven't read i'm just being honest i
haven't read of any accounts in the
united states where they were getting
real concerned about mormonism or forms
of christianity they should though you
know they they should be concerned about
those things too but the particular
right-wing legislators suddenly realized
oh whoa if we remove government from
this part of the economy uh guess who
guess who takes over guess who really
benefits from it and as i say you know
this idea
of choice on the free market it presumes
that there is something there already
for you to choose between but that's
already been produced for you to choose
between like
you can go to the grocery store and
choose between buying bananas and buying
strawberries
because they've already been created
and you know
this is uh
this is not the reality of how education
works it's also not the reality of how
sewage treatment works or how building
roads works you can't you don't get up
in the morning start your car and think
why would i choose to drive on this road
rather than
rather than another road built by
another company uh to it to a different
standard or something
so yeah um
okay so return to the question sent in
from hannibal on patreon at long last uh
okay
part of what i do on youtube is
philosophical i was walking through a
graveyard the other day and i wondered
to myself if i were to choose the words
that were to appear on my own tombstone
would i include something about
philosophy or being a philosopher
the main thing i do philosophically in
these discussions is to help people to
visualize a problem
very often it's more important
than any particular solution so i give
numerous examples of this when it's
coming my channel
very often face to face
the way i have won arguments is
precisely by helping the other person
visualize clearly what it was they'd
been misapprehending before and why it
was they were thus disagreeing with me
or fighting with me so you know i'd say
one of the simplest examples here i i've
currently
basically nobody has argued this point
with me was that um
there were many vegans who were
exaggerating the numbers of people
participating in uh vegan protests vegan
rallies
what we call vegan workshops vegan vegan
festivals festivals good work and they'd
claim 50 000 people were at this
festival
now
the most important i know this may not
seem that philosophical but really it is
the most important counter argument i
have to pose is
okay
here's a photograph of a stadium with
just 5 000 people sitting in it this is
what 5 000 people look like sitting at a
rock concert here's a photograph of 10
000 people that's what a crowd ten
thousand people looks like
here's a crowd of fifty thousand people
you know like you're making these claims
and you're not actually
visualizing what they would mean in
practice so you're making yourself
susceptible to a completely abstract
line of reasoning which isn't so much
debunked by visualizing it correctly but
if we visualize it correctly we're going
to ask different questions leading to
very different um conclusions this is an
easy example it may not seem to you that
this is tremendously philosophical but
you'll see now that it becomes
philosophical right away um
one of the ideologies that unfortunately
bernie sanders made much more popular in
the united states of america is called
mmt
mmt is modern monetary theory
and um this is basically the theory that
the government has unlimited amounts of
money now if you just read the
newspapers it it seems believable in an
abstract way so just recently we heard
that joe biden is going to spend one
trillion dollars on new infrastructure
we've heard numbers in the billions and
trillions being announced and it seems
that the government never goes bankrupt
it seems the government never runs out
of money and there are some people in
the newspapers warning that the
government will go bankrupt and randomly
but you know we all seem to live with a
certain level of kind of public
discourse that seems to encourage us
this belief that the government's wealth
is is infinite
now
in terms of visualizing that i'm going
to just give an example here that i'll
make some more use of later in answering
hannibal's question
how many people do in the audience are
now
we have 36
people
in the audience okay
so let's say
we gather together
36 people plus me and melissa
and uh
let's say we bring a doctor and a nurse
because we mentioned that earlier okay
let's say us right now
about 40 people in total
in the year 2021 we pack our bags we get
our tents ready and we move to a small
island
so this is not a desert island scenario
this is not that our airplane has
crashed we decide that we're sick and
tired of just chatting about politics on
youtube and we're going to go start a
new life
farming on this remote island so you
pack whatever you want you bring your
laptop computer i'm just saying you have
all the all the modern conveniences you
can carry
and you go to this island and you start
a new life and we have axes and hatchets
and
shovels and whatever you know this kind
of thing
um
okay so as soon as we're there and we
start living this life
our daily reality is shaped by
scarcity
right so
a lot of people here are vegan as soon
as you start surviving on this island we
would have no choice but to start eating
fish you're on this island and about the
only resource you've got there's fish
maybe there are some seagulls if you
want to eat seagulls or seagull eggs and
of course we haven't farmed anything yet
we haven't planted anything
melissa's laughing and i wonder why
yeah
i don't know it's something i've had to
something about to research you have to
uh oh well freda freedom mentions
coconut
you get sick of the coconuts real quick
let me tell you um
anyway you know when you first arrive
you haven't planted anything yet you
haven't farmed anything yet you start
scratching at the ground and planting
things and gathering things in the
forest you start cutting down trees
there's only a certain amount of wood
there's a certain amount of rainfall
rainfall is your only source of drinking
water and so on you know you start
farming you start
struggling to survive right
now this theory popularized by bernie
sanders
about mmt
what if
somebody shows up the 41st person shows
up in the island and says hey guys
don't worry i've got the solution
all we have to do is distribute this
currency
and as long as we have a government
printing and distributing currency the
amount of currency in circulation is is
infinite it's unlimited
so all our problems are solved
you know
now this is a visualization exercise
right
there is a sense in which this madman
the 41st person on island there's a
sense in which what they're saying is
true we can use an unlimited number of
tokens an
unlimited number of pieces of paper
to represent
the transactions in our society we can
use an unlimited amount of currency to
represent the things that are being
produced and exchanged
right
but that doesn't increase or improve the
actual things being exchanged that
doesn't change
our actual situation
yeah
so
right away just in bringing down that
level where now we're thinking about 40
people on one island maybe the only
things the island can produce are
coconuts
fish
lumber to a limited extent you know
whatever we farm is going to take time
to grow maybe three months maybe a year
you know this is the reality of where
we're at on the salad now i just want to
say a couple more words about scarcity
which again it's not obvious in a mass
society we talk about a mass society of
millions of people and billions of
dollars
that myth about mmt starts to seem
believable oh we can just keep we can
keep spending billions of dollars on
nasa and billions of dollars in the
olympics while at the same time reducing
taxes and it'll never be a problem
you know it's just that we've taken too
many steps away from the type of economy
that we really can visualize on a human
scale ourselves now of course people who
have practice if you have many years of
experience in economic of course things
become easier to visually once you have
experience with what a million dollars
is really like you know it's not it gets
less let's mysterious with with uh with
time and practice so there you go lots
of lots of comments from the audience
nacho says dude i'm so ready let's buy a
island you don't need to
buy
come on they're giving them away there
are plenty of empty islands even even
here west coast of canada you don't need
to buy nothing man
u.s and canada lots of empty lines you
don't even have to go to a third world
country i'm telling you okay
all right so look i just want to say
this a little bit more i'm going to
reply i i am replying to this question
from patreon believe it or not okay
my point is ultimately most of us living
in the modern world what we have the
most trouble visualizing is scarcity
we can visualize wealth we know what
money means we know what would mean we
can visualize having a car having a
fancy car right but really understanding
what scarcity means has become strange
to us it's become difficult
you know to think from the ground up
about what scarce this one means so on
this island
so everybody in this audience all 40 of
us and so i'm 40 and remember including
one doctor and one nurse
um they may become a problem later on
they'll say um
all 40 of us
are highly intelligent highly
disciplined highly ethical people right
why because you're you're having this
conversation right we have honestly all
40 of us we probably would do
okay on and out okay i've mentioned you
that i have a mentally disabled brother
severely mentalism what if he moves down
okay now on this island so far as i've
described it there really is no money
there's no point we all know each other
we're all busy like you know think about
the process you're going to cut wood
you're going to build a hut you know
when you have time you're going to
improve the hut
right okay now my brother shows up and
joins us right and i'm just gonna say oh
hey guys
um you look you know we're all gonna
take care of my
my mentally brother
it's an imposition on everyone
right and if you have no money there's
no simple way to measure it's not gonna
say oh well that's gonna cost us
so much money so this is somebody with a
mouth to feed you you have to it is a
mouth to feed you know with a certain
amount of food a certain amount of labor
certain amount of time and this person
is gonna contribute nothing my own
brother as i mentioned he's never spoken
a sentence in any language he can't talk
he can't work he can't do nothing he
just eats and goes to the bathroom etc
and makes disturbing noises he's
severely severely mentally handicapped
okay and he needs somebody to take care
of one thing this person is a 100
imposition
cost
on our resources and they produce
and contribute
nothing okay can we cope with it are you
guys all motivated to take care of my
mentally handicapped brother
okay we got 40 people only okay what
happens if one of you has a kid so
somebody frida frida and nacho get
pregnant
okay you could have a mentally disabled
kid
are we capable of taking care of and
raising for the next 20 years or
something mentally disabled kids someone
who has a mouthfeed and again at this
point there's no money there's no way to
measure it in a mass society when you
have a society with millions and
billions of people right it becomes so
easy to write these things off it comes
what where's my mentally disabled
brother right now he's being taken care
of by the government of canada the
taxpayers my own taxes in theory
you know all of us in the society are
paying taxes so that my father and his
ex-wife
didn't have to raise that kid he's lived
his whole life in mental institutions
what do you want to say being cared for
by professional nurses his whole life he
still is now
right he's being fed and clothed and
taken to the bathroom and showered and
having his bum wipe for him
by professionals who went to university
to learn how to do that it's
unbelievably expensive on our island
with 40 people there's no way
there's no way we can do that now i
mentioned before the doctor and the
nurse
they may also start to say look the
doctor says hey he went to school for 15
years to become a doctor the nurse went
to school for 10 years become a nurse
they say look you guys you can't really
pay us salary we understand you're doing
this utopian commune here but if you
can't pay us to stay and take care of
you and contribute in this way we gotta
go because we could be earning a hundred
thousand dollars or more working at a
working at a normal hospital back in
normal society right
okay so again i am
so nacho says we can take turns right
right but it's a huge imposition on
everyone i agree i know that's how it is
i know that's how it is but it's a huge
imposition
you didn't think it was going to get
this dark melissa
but i mean this is this is you know i
mean what is scarcity and then you know
what is the brutality of an ancient
society so you guys know even rome
ancient rome they engaged in overt uh
uh fantasize you know
yeah actually what i thought of talking
about the person who would come to the
island and introduce mmt this currency
right well what would be the currency it
wouldn't be paper you know coming up i
don't know what would it be and just
that simple thing alone
order it from amazon
[Laughter]
um
okay
so
i i have a lot to say about this
the question again
it's problematizing the poverty of india
as if it's something extraordinary all
right as if india by default should be a
wealthy powerful country the same way
japan is or the same way america is
right
and instead really what you need to do
is understand scarcity and kind of
problematize wealth understand where
wealth arises from to quote you know the
title of adam smith's book you have to
understand the origin of the wealth of
nations
now
just say
that type of primitive society i've
described the 40 of us all living on an
island and we're all vegan but we're
forced to eat fish to survive terrible
we don't sit there complaining about the
cholesterol gee you know
back when i lived in civilization i was
vegan and now i've got to eat clams and
cockles and what is this
and we're reduced to the brutality of
being pescetarian by living on this
remote island because we can't farm for
crap and again farms take years to get
going the fastest turnaround in my
opinion is the papaya plant but i
digress papaya it's amazing in the
tropics you can plant it in just a
couple weeks later it's producing fruit
for it anyway um
you know i've looked at because of the
life i've lived i've looked at not just
the history but also the archaeology of
numerous
primitive and ancient societies around
the world where you can see how they
operate so i remember looking at the
archaeology of
ancient traditional societies in
northern scotland
and what you saw there is this up to a
certain point those societies just exist
in the small clusters we're describing
here 40 people
living in a cluster and there's a sense
in which they have neither wealth nor
poverty right you have so few people
living on this point on the coast of
scotland it could be an island it
doesn't matter it doesn't matter if it's
an island or just a part of the rocky
coast up there there are so few people
that there's unlimited wood
and unlimited fish and unlimited
drinking water relative to the
population you have so few people that
you're not running out of resources
there's a sense in which there's
abundance and plenty right but there's
also a sense in which you're in a state
of absolute scarcity absolute privation
you have to make everything with your
own hands the clothes you wear are the
clothes you make you know what i mean
this is really you know primitive travis
said right but
you know i know this may sound a hashtag
not vegan but
you know you will never run out of fish
and you'll never run out of wood okay
what changes
is that at some point in history
the furthest horizon
of the free market
moves
at some point
instead of killing fish for your own
family to eat
you're killing as many fish as possible
drying them in the sun
putting them on a wooden cart and
sending them down the road
and that road goes on and on and on and
it may be like
ancient uh you know in the era of bath
england being outpost of the roman
empire it may be it goes down the road
from scotland all the way to bath and
it's feeding the roman empire you're
feminine you're feeding legionaries of
the roman empire with with dried
uh salt fish you know produce you know
you fish them and dry them in the sun it
becomes a durable commodity this way in
an era before uh refrigerators now
everything changes
now suddenly all the things in your
community that didn't have a price
before have a price tag on them and all
the things that were not scarce before
are scarce now it's possible to kill the
fish to the point of extinction now the
number of you're killing as many fish as
you possibly can every day and now also
you don't just have to wear the clothes
in your own back the fish have a price
you're selling them you're getting paid
for them you can buy clothing that's
made by a person much more skilled than
you it's made in a factory somewhere to
some extent made by a craftsman or a
loom or what have you right so you know
this too in our island with 40 people
the doctor and the nurse say if we don't
pay them they're gonna run away they're
gonna go live in the big city they're
gonna go move to los angeles where they
can earn a hundred thousand dollars a
year doing the same job and we say okay
well
what can we do to pay our doctor and a
nurse
we have fish
we have trees
maybe we can farm papaya
now suddenly we have to take these
things and we have to
put them on a boat and take them to the
mainland and sell them
and we have to generate enough money to
pay for the doctor and so on right
small societies like this really exist
one of my former professors at
university of victoria was a specialist
in remote islands of polynesia and
oceania
so i did with him study and read about
some of those societies where
you know the whole thing is at a small
enough scale that you understand how
real the scarcity is one of these nouns
i'm not even going to attempt to name
them from memory because i'll get their
names wrong
but i remember they were bankrupting
themselves by just maintaining an army
of 10 soldiers
the king decided that he wanted to have
10 men with guns around him all the time
and formerly they hadn't had any at all
like i don't think there was no army and
now they had 10 guys and this alone was
like you know
there was just no economy to support it
you know what i mean um there was
another island i remember when there
were there were race riots in two of the
ethnic groups
and they burned down a large part of the
the only city
and you know what i'm reading about this
the article is written like more than 10
years later it's like
nothing nothing's being rebuilt
like that was it like the economy here
is fragile enough you know you have a
certain number of trees producing
coconuts you have a certain amount of
money being generated by fish but like
if you burn down a bunch of buildings in
the city there is no money there's no
investment there are no materials you
have to ship images we're like there's
like
damage done to the economy is much more
permanent and long-lasting than it would
be in a more in a more massive society
and like the ability of those societies
to keep one doctor on the island and to
have the materials used to really
provide you know to provide medicine to
provide education and so on it's it's
unbelievably limited okay so you know my
point is here to say at the most
primitive and small scale
uh society emerges out of a context of
total privation
and total scarcity
and to some extent in that situation
the distinction between wealth and
poverty doesn't exist
right but
if someone has a mentally disabled child
they're incapable of taking care of it
right like this is part of the tragedy
of the ancient world infanticide is
talked about even in the ancient
buddhist texts where people are opposed
to
well there's bad karma from killing
anything even killing a mosquito and
people have to kill their own children
and it's horrifying that's terrifying so
you know there's a sense in which you
can try to make this out to be a utopia
because there's no money there's no
measurement of the difference between
between rich and poor but the scarcity
is
absolute right
now
you know if you're asking the question
i'm sorry i'm sorry i'm laughing but
from my perspective it's it's ridiculous
if you ask the question
uh why is india
not a tremendously wealthy and powerful
place
in the way that japan and the united
states are to me this reflects i'm not
i'm not saying this to insult you
hannibal
this reminds me so much of the left-wing
mentality
that regards
abundance
and wealth and plenty as the birthright
of humanity right so i hear that from
the left i hear that word birthright all
the time from the far left wing from
black hammer the left wing group we
talked about you know but across the
board i hear this all the time the idea
of a birthright you're born to this so
you're entitled to have it and that's it
there's there should be no there should
be no question of of scarcity uh that
mankind's birthright is just to have
this kind of limited abundance
and then what the far left does is they
look at the situation and they say well
if there isn't
wealth and luxury and power if people
don't have a wonderful life if they
don't have the kind of abundance and
leisure that they're supposedly born to
have then there must be a conspiracy
then it must be that so-called
capitalism
has somehow deprived people of the
wealth and leisure that they're entitled
to by default just as their birth
so i hope you see why i took so much
time to talk through what really is our
birthright what we really are entitled
to
by default and that is a very hard
scrabble existence an existence where
there's neither wealth or poverty but
where we face absolute scarcity absolute
privatization all the time where our
options in life are are incredibly
limited now
to be fair and i i do i'm not i'm not
just doing this to be a contributor list
i think it's really significant to point
out that many people in the right wing
indulge in the same type of fantasy
where what they want to justify is
deregulating the market having an
unregulated free market
and they justify this by claiming that
again our natural birthright is just for
everyone to have wealth and plenty and
opportunity like you know you work hard
but you're paid well like that's just
the default state of nature on planet
earth
and then if there ever is poverty if
there ever is a problem if the system
doesn't work as it's supposed to that
then they will they will attribute this
to a kind of conspiracy the other way
where they will blame government
regulation they will blame socialism
they will say well if only the free
market were left to its own devices we
would all have this abundance we're
supposedly born into and entitled to
so um
you know
there is nothing mysterious
about
poverty
um there is nothing mysterious
about why
india would be mired in poverty
forever
and
you know this comes back to the the
final reason why i introduced this image
of a soul living on an island so
the 40 of oh now we have 41.
someone's got to get kicked off the
island
we used to be all good it's down to 40.
all right sorry sorry the 40 of us the
40 people in this in this audience
um
let's say we go to the island and let's
say we make progress from pescetarian to
veganism so at first we have to kill all
these fish to survive but we work hard
we start planting crops we're tilling
the soil we're planting fruit and
cutting up green vegetables
we plant rice i don't know yeah rice
there you go we become rice farmers and
after a few years the economy is rolling
and we have enough we have enough to
survive we have enough wood
we have enough rain water that we're
gathering i'm presuming this island does
not have any kind of spring producing
potable water right so we're just
gathering rainwater very limited water
resources
um
very limited wood
very limited food
what happens if the population doubles
what happens if the population
quadruples
what happens if the population increases
by ten to one
right
so i mean this is the side of economics
nobody really wants to talk about
anymore i mean marxist
try to make everything about labor
as if the reality is well i can quote
mao zedong on this mao zedong refused to
deal with overpopulation in china
um
by inventing the
colorful uh turn of phrase that for
every one mouth
there are two hands
uh i think i think it's a little bit for
every one mouth that needs to eat there
are two hands that need to work
something like this like like by
definition
all human beings are just going to be so
productive with their labor that will
never have scarcity well
population of afghanistan doubled under
american occupation by the way 19
19 um
19 years their population approximately
uh doubled so we we live in a world in a
situation of
absolute scarcity we live in a world
where the value of what we produce
is only
measured relative to the market on the
horizon we can export it to so give an
example i mean this one would take some
research for you guys to relate to um
i'm not saying this to insult you but
it's hard for people to imagine this you
know the first phase of the expansion of
the japanese empire
is all about sugar
it's all about planting sugar and
growing sugar and selling sugar right
every single one of those sugar fields
is now shut down it's no longer it's no
longer profitable it's no longer
productive right now you know times
change the world has changed to an
unbelievable extent what did japan do as
soon as they conquered taiwan i should
put concord in quotation marks wasn't
really a conquest but whatever
uh japan expanded its empire to include
taiwan
sugar sugarcane that was going to be the
that was the big crop that was the most
important economic priority they built
they built new railroads
in order to access
the sugar crops now today can you
imagine sugar like
taiwan isn't a huge amount of area
anyway can you imagine a few little
sugar fields a few little fields of this
crop producing enough money to pay for
building a railroad even over 50 years
in installments it will never happen
it's worthless it's worth pennies you
know sure the idea that sugar would be
massively profitable and it was for a
time right and the japanese had access
to a market where they could
export that sure sell that sure it
doesn't matter what's exporting or not
where that sugar was really worth enough
money to pay for building a railroad now
you can look at india today what do you
think you think history can repeat
itself you think india can get rich
farming sugar no
do you think haiti can get rich farming
sugar no heaty can lock itself into
perpetual poverty vermin sugar you know
haiti was poor uh 300 years ago farming
sugar they're they're still poor now
uh farming sugar you know
so um
[Music]
you know
i know i mean
sorry my first point on this really is
my last point i think the problem with
these questions in economics and
political philosophy it's a problem of
visualization
uh and also of course it's partly a
problem of attitude and it's a problem
of feeling entitled
it is completely ridiculous for the
people of india to look at the united
states of america or look at japan and
say we're entitled to this is our
birthright
no you're not none of us are i mean it's
completely ridiculous for the people of
india to
to think that the default mode of life
on earth is what exists in the
wealthiest countries on the earth and to
think that they can achieve it you know
without without making sacrifices you
know now i think everyone in this
audience knows i don't think i'm gonna
have to lean on you to to prove i don't
think you're gonna be terribly um
skeptical about this the level of wealth
that china has today
china went from being one of the poorest
countries in the world i just mentioned
that the nadir of mao zedong's communism
in china china was poorer than mongolia
which was
devastating to the chinese ego they got
down to an incredibly low level of
poverty right and they have become
moderately affluent you know
there still are poor people in china but
they have they have made tremendous
economic progress
during a period in which they had a
one-child policy
do you think that's unrelated
you know economic decisions involve
sacrifice within a closed system of
having finite resources
um
whether you're thinking about a tiny
island
or you know a province like saskatchewan
in canada where i was in saskatchewan
basically all the government revenue all
the tax money the government had came
from a pot ash mine at a very productive
potash mine there were a few other
mining projects within the province i
mean it might as well be a small island
alexa what's the population of
saskatchewan
in 2020 the population of saskatchewan
was 1.17 million people so just over 1
million people okay guys 1.1
million people
it's
tiny and in terms of population study in
terms of land it's enormous so you have
tax revenue coming in from just a few
industries like this you have a pot ash
mine you have a few a few projects like
this right and then
with that revenue you've got to provide
all these social services for your
population you've got to provide
hospitals and education and roads and
plumbing and electricity you know you
have to you have to accomplish all these
amazing things with the the money
generated from just a few of these uh uh
a few of these these these opportunities
and it's a tremendous challenge now
when i talk about making sacrifice that
you're gonna do some things and not
others i don't just mean population
that's the old theory called
malthusianism or malthusianism of
putting all the emphasis on population
you know what you have to make tough
choices whether you think of the tiny
island society a medium-sized society
like saskatchewan or or china okay so
saskatchewan has a certain amount of
money being generated yeah okay there's
a little bit from farming farming's
network potash mining a few mines
uh in terms of industries we had an oil
refinery we didn't have oil but we had
an oil refinery so there's a little bit
of money generated from that a few
little projects down there right okay
um
used to have uranium mines right in the
north i think they're all
still a little bit of iranian money
um
you want to go to the olympics this year
guys
out of that money i mean again
how how many people you get do you want
the population to double do you want the
population to sit your populations they
have if you have only so many resources
and where you acknowledge the extent to
which your costs and your tax revenue
ultimately do rest on resources you know
okay so do you want to go to the
olympics this year how many men do you
want to have in space how many people
should be on the international space
station how many space shuttles do you
want to put into space right
he said these are real questions with
real consequences
of the resources we have in our
in our economy and in our ecology again
this is very easy to visualize on the
small island maybe harder with
saskatchewan maybe harder with china
how much
of our time and money and land and water
is gonna go into cows
you guys already know i'm i'm vegan but
you know
it really is there's a finite amount of
resources in the system
and you're choosing to put it into the
cows it's a finite amount of resource
and systems you choose to put in dogs
too you know what are they talking about
dogs or sheep or cows you know
some of the most significant decisions
governments can make is what we're not
going to do there was a visionary
decision made by the government of
singapore singapore is a small island
much bigger population
alexa what's the population of singapore
in 2020 the population of singapore was
5.76 million people
5.76
million
um
you know singapore one of the most
important decisions the government ever
made
was to kick out the car industry
they decided they were not going to
manufacture vehicles anymore
so you know around the world all kinds
of governments recording and pursuing
you know vehicle manufacturing but they
they they did the research they did the
math and they said well
we have only so much space
we have only so much pollution we can
tolerate like you know they're not even
like against pollution like the
government it's not like they're
crusaders for ecology they're really not
like okay like within this much area how
much air pollution how much water
pollution how much resource use can we
tolerate and the reality is it was they
made the decision just at the right time
they're like well the reality is what
we're going to go into here what's what
the real future on this island is
circuit board manufacturing and they
talk about it less there's also guns
munition manufacturing so there's some
high-tech
high-end manufacturing business they say
you know what the best thing we can do
for the car industry is get rid of it
you guys plenty of space in malaysia
indonesia go somewhere else go to china
we don't care get out
kick out the the car you know um to my
knowledge you know sweden made a
different decision where they decided to
kick out small car manufacturing and
focus on big uh big heavy truck
manufacturing it's a little bit
different and sweden is not a small
island it was a question of how to
compete and so on but you know the
decision in singapore that we're not
gonna do uh automotive manufacturing so
you know
um
this is my point
we could ask the question simply
how much more poverty-stricken would
china be today
if their population had doubled
again
instead of having the one-child policy
in the period in which they did have a
bunch of policy how much wealthier
could india be
today
if they did have a one-child policy
during the same period of time when
china had a one-child policy now
i'm not a maltousian i don't use this as
the only um
you know
example i don't think this is the the
one and only example that matters but
the point is that ultimately governments
have to make very tough decisions about
what it is they are going to do and what
it is they are not going to do and the
difference between the wealth of
different kinds of nations ultimately
arises not from the free market left to
its own devices but to the long-term
implant pardon me the long-term impacts
and implications of those decisions
whether they're made badly or whether
they're made well
whether they're made democratically or
whether they are made
despotically